Theory: Input & Output, Success & Fail (#8)
apisyouwonthate/book-build-apis-2: src/1-theory/3-input-and-output.adoc

----

.Using Python and the Requests HTTP library to make an HTTP Request
[source,python]
----
import json
import requests

headers = {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',
}
payload = {
    'user_id': 2
}
req = requests.post(
  'http://api.example.org/moments/1/gift',
  data=json.dumps(payload),
  headers=headers
)
----

It's all the same in any language. Define your headers, define the body in an
appropriate format, and send it on its way.

There are a bunch of HTTP methods you might run into:

- GET
- POST
- PUT
- PATCH
- DELETE
- HEAD
- OPTIONS
- TRACE

These methods might look familiar from your favourite web application frameworks
routing layer, as pretty much every framework offers HTTP method based routing.

.Rails example of using HTTP-based routes.
[source,ruby]
----
get 'photos', to: 'photos#index'
post 'photos', to: 'photos#create'
get 'photos/:id', to: 'photos#show'
put 'photos/:id', to: 'photos#update_full'
delete 'photos/:id', to: 'photos#index'
----

.Express (NodeJS) example of using HTTP-based routes.
[source,javascript]
----
app.get('/photos', (req, res) => { ... })
app.post('/photos', (req, res) => { ... })
----

> That said some like Rails (Ruby) and Laravel (PHP) heavily market their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That said some frameworks like Rails (Ruby) and Laravel (PHP) heavily market their
```

automagical routing conventions to abstract away from manually declaring these
routes. These two frameworks and probably others do have command line utilities

> for printing out the routes it is generating, which are `$ rails routes` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for printing out the routes they are generating, which are `$ rails routes` and
```

`$ php artisan route:list` respectively.

=== HTTP Methods

Over the years a lot of people have tried to suggest that HTTP methods do not
matter, and anyone who suggests using the right one for the right job is just
doing a "Well Actually..." and should spend their time working on something more
useful. If you are not using HTTP to its full extent, that stance might be
partially true, but when you start to leverage the full power of HTTP that
opinion is totally false.

For example, many tools will know that they can cache a GET request, but know
that caching a POST would be spooky and problematic. They will know they can
retry a PUT or a DELETE, but better not retry a PATCH. These conventions allow a
lot of tools that do not have direct knowledge of each other to work together.

Let's learn a bit more about these HTTP methods.

==== GET

Just fetch some stuff from the server. This is the best example of an "idempotent" action, and this is a word which pops up a bit in API land.

Idempotent means you can do this thing over and over again, and it happening two

> or more times won't result in  different outcomes. If you GET the thing, but the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or more times won't result in different outcomes. If you GET the thing, but the
```

Don't ask me why I spot double whitespace... 🙈🙈🙈

request fails or times out, and you GET it again, the end result is that you got
it. Nothing was deleted, or removed, or changed in any lasting way, so if this
thing is got a bunch of times it is the same as being got once.

> NOTE: They can technically have a body some servers and tools will start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: GET requests can technically have a body, and some servers and tools will start
```

acting a bit wonky, meaning people generally avoid creating GETs with bodies.

==== POST

Often used purely for "creates" but can be used for any non-idempotent action.

Creating something is a good example of a non-idempotent action, because if you
send two requests to create a thing, you now have two things. You could also be

> triggering the sending of an email, paying an invoice, etc., it does not have to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
triggering the sending of an email, paying an invoice, etc. It does not have to
```

> be a create.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be a create, but it will result in that action being executed every time you make a request.
```

==== PUT

Often incorrectly associated with being an "edit" action, PUT can actually do a
whole lot more than that. PUT is designed to be an idempotent way to send data
to a server, where the request contains the entirety of the resource. Whatever
it says should go, so if the attempt fails for any reason and the client

> retries, there wil be no negative consequence as its said the same thing twice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
retries, there will be no negative consequence as it's said the same thing twice.
```

An example of this would be an image upload. An API might have the ability to
upload an image for a user, which is probably a profile image. A request with

> `PUT /users/jane/image` and a body of either the image contents (or a JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PUT /users/jane/image` and a body of the image contents (or a JSON
```

payload with a URL) could then provide the image. It does not matter if the user
already had an image or not, if the request is a success they will have one. If

> the upload fails that is fine, another request can be set, and it will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the upload fails that is fine, another request can be made, and it will be
```

overridden.

NOTE: Some folks get a bit concerned about this being a "create or update"
action, but their concern comes from a misplaced sense that HTTP verbs
correspond to a specific CRUD action. If somebody complains at you about this,
politely point them at this section.

> PUT is not always appropriate, and can lead to race conditions if not used

Reviewer: Would be cool to include an example of a race condition resulting from PUT (or just explain a bit more) :)

Reviewer: ^ ignore that,  I should clearly read the section ahead before commenting 🤣 🙈

cautiously.

===== 🏎 Race Conditions 🏎

Think about a resource represented with JSON, that has two properties:
`property1` and `property2`. After getting the initial value of the resource
with a GET request, two different HTTP clients make requests (Request A and

> (Request B) to update the value of just one property via a PUT. Both `property1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Request B) to update the value of just one property via a PUT. Both `property1`
```

**Request A**

Updating `property1` to be true.

[source,text]
====
PUT /foos/123

{
  "property1": true,
  "property2": false
}
====

**Request B**

Updating `property2` to be true.

[source,text]
====
PUT /foos/123

{
  "property1": false,
  "property2": true
}
====

Both properties started at `false`, and both clients were only trying to update one property, but little do they know they are clobbering the results and essentially reverting the updates from other clients. Instead of ending up with both values being `true`, the API will just hold whatever the most recent request was, which is going to be `"property1": false` and `"property2": true`.

Some folks consider this to be a feature, but others consider it a bug because if they only want to update one property, why do they need to send everything? People in the second camp decide to just send the relevant properties they want to change, which is a flagrant misuse of how PUT is supposed to work and can lead to confusion with tools that expect PUT to contain an entire resource, not just partial changes.

For partial changes, there is another method.

==== PATCH

> Patch is a more recent condition to HTTP, with its RFC being finalized in 2010.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Patch is a more recent addition to HTTP, with its RFC being finalized in 2010.
```

[quote,Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5789]
====
The existing HTTP PUT method only allows a complete replacement of a document.
This proposal adds a new HTTP method, PATCH, to modify an existing HTTP resource.
====

So if PUT is for when a client has all the answers and wants to give that
exactly to the server, PATCH is for when the client only wants to update certain
parts of the resource.

Some folks have never heard of the conflict scenario above, and recommend PATCH
because it is essentially a performance improvement. Technically they are right:
sending less stuff over the wire is quicker than sending more stuff.

> How exactly PATCH works can vary on which data format you're using. If its JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How exactly PATCH works can vary depending on which data format you're using. If its JSON
```

[quote,Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7396]
____

Given the following example JSON document:

  {
    "title": "Goodbye!",
    "author" : {
      "givenName" : "John",
      "familyName" : "Doe"
    },
    "tags":[ "example", "sample" ],
    "content": "This will be unchanged"
  }

A user agent wishing to change the value of the "title" member from
"Goodbye!" to the value "Hello!", add a new "phoneNumber" member,
remove the "familyName" member from the "author" object, and replace
the "tags" array so that it doesn't include the word "sample" would
send the following request:

  PATCH /my/resource HTTP/1.1
  Host: example.org
  Content-Type: application/merge-patch+json

  {
    "title": "Hello!",
    "phoneNumber": "+01-123-456-7890",
    "author": {
      "familyName": null
    },
    "tags": [ "example" ]
  }

The resulting JSON document would be:

  {
    "title": "Hello!",
    "author" : {
      "givenName" : "John"
    },
    "tags": [ "example" ],
    "content": "This will be unchanged",
    "phoneNumber": "+01-123-456-7890"
  }
____

==== HEAD

Pretty much exactly the same as GET in every way, but HEAD responses must not

> contain a body. This is great for checks to see if something exists, and if it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contain a body. This is great for checks to see if something exists (by inspecting the status code), and if it
```

does the client does not have to wait for the entire response body to be
generated then sent down the wire.

==== DELETE

Guess what this does?!

DELETE requests _can_ contain a body, but generally do not. They are considered
idempotent like PUT, because if you are asking to delete something, and you
accidentally delete it twice, then the response both times should be "Yes this
is deleted".

Some APIs do not implement it that way so a second attempt to
delete the same thing will get a 404. That is a bit of a shame as it means
clients can get a "You cannot delete this" message when they did in fact delete
it... plan accordingly.

== Responses

Much the same as an HTTP request, your HTTP response is going to end up as plain
text (unless you're using SSL, but hang on, we aren't there yet).

.Example HTTP response containing a JSON body
[source,http]
----
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "user":{
    "id":1,
    "name":"Theron Weissnat",
    "bio":"Occaecati excepturi magni odio distinctio dolores.",
    "picture_url":"https://cdn.example.org/foo.png",
    "created_at":"2013-11-22 16:37:57"
  }
}
----

> First you might notice then `200 OK`, which is a HTTP status code that says things worked as expected. No issues here buddy. Then there is the `Content-Type`, which just says the data is JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First you might notice the `200 OK`, which is an HTTP status code that says things worked as expected. No issues here buddy. Then there is the `Content-Type`, which just says the data is JSON.
```

=== HTTP Status Codes

A status code is a category of success or failure, with specific codes
being provided for a range of situations, that are essentially metadata
supplementing the body returned from the API.

Back in the early 2000s when AJAX was first a thing, it was far too common for
people to ignore everything other than the body, and return some XML or JSON
saying:

[source,javascript]
----
{ "success": true }
----

These days it's far more common to utilize HTTP properly, and give the
response a status code as defined in the RFC have a number from `200` to
`599` -- with plenty of gaps in between -- and each has a message and a
definition. Most server-side languages, frameworks, etc., default to
`200 OK`.

> Status codes are grouped into a few different categories:, with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status codes are grouped into a few different categories, with the
```

response was sent. A `200 OK` means you got your answer, a `201 Created` means
the thing was created, and a `202 Accepted` is similar but does not say anything
about the actual result, it only indicates that a request was accepted and is
being processed asynchronously. It could still go wrong, but at the time of
responding it was all looking good so far.

=== 3XX is all about redirection

These are all about sending the calling application somewhere else for the
actual resource. The best known of these are the `303 See Other` and the `301
Moved Permanently`, which are used a lot on the web to redirect a browser to
another URL. Usually a redirect will be combined with a `Location` header to
point to the new location of the content.

=== 4XX is all about client errors

Indicate to your clients that they did something wrong. They might have
forgotten to send authentication details, provided invalid data, requested a
resource that no longer exists, or done something else wrong which needs fixing.

=== 5XX is all about service errors

With these status codes, the API, or some network component like a load
balancer, web server, application server, etc. is indicating that something went

> wrong in their side. For example, a database connection failed, or another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wrong on their side. For example, a database connection failed, or another
```

service was down. Typically, a client application can retry the request. The
server can even specify when the client should retry, using a `Retry-After` HTTP
header.

=== Common Status Codes

Arguments between developers will continue for the rest of time over the
exact appropriate code to use in any given situation, but these are the
most important status codes to look out for in an API:

* 200 - Generic everything is OK
* 201 - Created something OK
* 202 - Accepted but is being processed async (for a video means
encoding, for an image means resizing, etc.)
* 400 - Bad Request (should really be for invalid syntax, but some folks
use for validation)
* 401 - Unauthorized (no current user and there should be)
* 403 - The current user is forbidden from accessing this data
* 404 - That URL is not a valid route, or the item resource does not
exist
* 405 - Method Not Allowed (your framework will probably do this for
you)
* 409 - Conflict (Maybe somebody else just changed some of this data, or
status cannot change from e.g: "published" to "draft")

> * 410 - Data has been deleted, deactivated, suspended, etc.

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to include the official iana Description in all of these, so people can associate the formal name with the explanation in their heads more easily. Or it might just be me. :P Either way something like 
```suggestion
* 410 - Gone - Data has been deleted, deactivated, suspended, etc.
```

* 415 - The request had a `Content-Type` which the server does not know
how to handle
* 429 - Rate Limited, which means take a breather, sleep a bit, try
again

> * 500 - Something unexpected happened, and it is the APIs fault

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 500 - Something unexpected happened, and it is the API's fault
```

* 503 - API is not here right now, please try again later

You might spot others popping up from time to time, so check on
http://http.cat/[http.cats] (or
http://www.iana.org/assignments/http-status-codes/http-status-codes.xhtml[iana.org]
for a more formal list) when you see one that's not familiar.

== Mime Types

HTTP APIs can work with all sorts of data. Whilst SOAP may have been restricted
to XML, REST and GraphQL can work with any response types. gRPC is kinda stuck
with Protobuf.

An API can support almost unlimited options, but of course building support for
every content type ever would be a rather laborious job. There are a few we can
cut out early on.

=== Ditch Form Data

"Form Data" uses the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` mime type, and mostly
only seems to be used by PHP developers. Luckily most other folks ignore this
wholeheartedly.

.Form data doesn't really have data types, just awkward strings.
[source]
----
foo=something&bar=1&baz=0
----

> Another issue with form data is similar to how XML suffers a lack of obvious

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One issue with form data is similar to how XML suffers a lack of obvious
```

data types. For example, to handle a boolean a client has to send `1` or `0`,
because `bar=true` would be `string("true")` on the server-side.

Data types are important, so let's not just throw them out the window for the
sake of "easy access to our data", especially as most web application frameworks
have something like `$request->body->foo` to easily get to the foo property.

WARNING: Rails is awful at this. If you have a `?foo=a` query string parameter,
and you also send `{ "foo": "b" }` in the HTTP body, then `params[:foo]` will be
set to `"b"` as the latter overrides the former. Code that you build, including
any generic frameworks/tooling that you release, should avoid conflating query
strings and body properties at all costs. They're different things and this
nonsense causes confusion, especially when you realize that `params[:action]`
means "controller method name" and actually overrides whatever is in `?action=`
_without_ anything being in the body...

> .Instead of form data, use a nice JSON object.

Reviewer: Maybe it's worth including an example of this request using form data before you give the JSON example? If anything the length of the URL (and lol URls have max length which sometimes bites your form data in the ass!) should put people off enough?

Reviewer: LOL I really need to read on before commenting! In any case for some reason the bad example before the good example could work better, but that might just be me, so feel free to ignore. 😇 

The point about URLs having a limit could be good to mention. It bit us when we worked with Magento's API and they wanted a ton of stuff posted as a form, and the descriptions of products can get quite long... took me a while to work out the browser was just cutting it off after ~2000 chars!  (https://stackoverflow.com/questions/417142/what-is-the-maximum-length-of-a-url-in-different-browsers)

[source,http]
----
POST /checkins HTTP/1.1
Host: api.example.org
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "checkin": {
        "place_id" : 1,
        "message": "This is a bunch of text.",
        "with_friends": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    }
}
----

This is a perfectly valid HTTP body for a checkin. You know what they are
saying. You know who the user is from their auth token. You know who they are
with and you get the benefit of having it wrapped up in a single `checkin` key

> for simple documentation, and, easy "You sent a checkin object to the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and, easy "You sent a checkin object to the user
```
I think I know what you're trying to say here, but perhaps it could be said in its own sentence, unrelated to the first part? Looks like a thought shortcut a bit. :)

settings page, muppet." responses.

That same request using form data is a mess.

.The alternative to a nice JSON object when using form data.
[source,http]
----
POST /checkins HTTP/1.1
Host: api.example.org
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

checkin[place_id]=1&checkin[message]=This is a bunch of text.&checkin[with_friends][]=1&checkin[with_friends][]=2&checkin[with_friends][]=3&checkin[with_friends][]=4&checkin[with_friends][]=5
----

This makes me upset _and_ angry. Do not do it in your API.

.Mandrill API is having a rough time.
image::images/input-encoded-madness.jpg[Mandril API supports form encoded payloads and this seems to also be urlencoded and everyone is sad.]

Finally, do not try to be clever by mixing JSON with form data:

.This is nonsense. Do not do it.
[source,http]
----
POST /checkins HTTP/1.1
Host: api.example.org
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

json="{
    \"checkin\": {
        \"place_id\" : 1,
        \"message\": \"This is a bunch of text.\",
        \"with_friends\": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    }
}"
----

This actually happens surprisingly often in the wild.

image::images/input-output-json-json.jpg[]

> Some folks even

Reviewer: // TODO ? :D

handling different data types. That might not worry dynamic language developers
all that much, but look at this:

.An example of a bunch of different data types in JSON.
[source,javascript]
----
{
  "place": {
    "id" : 1,
    "name": "This is a bunch of text.",
    "is_true": false,
    "maybe": null,
    "empty_string": ""
  }
}
----

.The same example but in XML.
[source,xml]
----
<places>
    <place>
        <id>1</id>,
        <name>This is a bunch of text.</name>
        <is_true>0</is_true>
        <maybe />
        <empty_string />
    </place>
</places>
----

Basically, in XML, _everything_ is considered a string, meaning integers,
booleans, and nulls can be confused. Both `maybe` and `empty_string` have the
same value, because there is no way to denote a null value either. Gross.

Work out which content type(s) you actually need, and _stick to that_. The
Flickr API used to support `lolcat` as a joke, and that was probably the result
of a hack project in which the development team were only paid with cold pizza.
JSON is fine.

CSV can be pretty handy as an export format too, especially if your API is
offering data for any sort of "Reports".

> Whatever you decide to offer, make it very clear on your documentation what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whatever you decide to offer, make it very clear in your documentation what
```

formats are supported. HTTP clients can request a specific `Content-Type` be
used for the response by placing it in the `Accept` header on the request, and
if that type is not available you can return a 406 Not Acceptable response,
which is one of many errors an API can return when a request goes wrong.

image::images/406.jpg[406 - Not Acceptable - Kitty does not want a bath.]

// TODO when to return a body
// - PATCH/PUT/POST returning content, maaaaybe it should be Content-Location
// instead of a direct return

> // What (if anything) do you return in the response body for POST, PUT and PATCH?

Reviewer: Also worth clarifying what to return when the resource exists but it's empty? Eg. a list of products that has no products in it at the mo. I've seen some people return 404 when I think it should have been 200 with an empty body, no? I think it's a common mistake / source of confusion.
